Okay, so you've had some time
to think about Mary vs Sharmila.
So which one of them would be the more
valuable customer, where value
is defined as likely to make more
donations in the next five opportunities?
In fact, I'd like a show of
hands from you over here.
So, if you think that Mary is the one
who will be more valuable in the future,
raise your hand.
Great.
And for those of you that think
Sharmila will be the more valuable one.
Let's see 'em.
Okay.
And any of you think it'll be a tie?
Any of you think that Mary and
Sharmila will be worth pretty
much the same as each other?
Anyone go for a tie?
No one likes a tie.
No one ever goes for a tie.
And I mean this seriously,
that if we're in this analytic space and
it's our job as a consultant or
a vendor firm to score the customer
database to say who's the most valuable.
Who's the least valuable and
how everyone ranks in between.
If we said these two are a tie, it would
make it sound like we don't know what
we're doing here, so
it's interesting that we don't like ties.
All right, so
let's talk about Mary versus Sharmila.
And it's interesting to see that I saw
not all, but most of the hands go up for
Mary, although for those of you who did
vote for Sharmila, I can understand why.
Cuz if we look back at Mary
versus Sharmila, it seems pretty
obvious why Sharmila would be the better
customer, because if you count up
the number of donations that they made,
Mary made four, Sharmila made five.
If you went to this nonprofit, or
any company, and say hey look.
Here's a customer who made four purchases,
here's a customer who made five purchases.
Which one do you think
is more valuable to you?
People are gonna give you a funny look.
Well, it's kinda obvious isn't it,
I'm gonna take five over the four, right?
Yet, most of you didn't vote for
Sharmila, most of you voted for Mary.
And why is that?
How can it be the case that
someone who actually missed
two donation opportunities might be more
valuable than someone who missed only one?
And of course the answer to that question,
if you can say it to the camera right now.
Cuz it's not only a function of how
many donations did they make, or
how many opportunities did they miss,
but it's also very important
to take into account when they made or
missed those opportunities.
You see with Mary, yes it's true
that she missed two times, but
in both cases she came back afterwards.
But for Sharmila,
that zero at the end there, that might
mean more than just oops I forgot.
It might mean that she no longer
likes our organization and
she doesn't want to deal with us.
It might mean that she no
longer has any needs at all for
this particular service that we provide.
It might be that she moved
to some other geography.
It might be that she died.
I mean, I don't know, but
there can be all kinds of reasons
why this zero that we see for
Sharmila might not just be an oops.
It might be a she's gone and
she's not coming back.
So for those of you voted for
Mary over Sharmila, you're looking
at that zero at the end there and
saying that zero, that single zero for
Sharmila carries a lot of weight.
In fact it carries more weight then
the two zeros that we saw for Mary.
And if you think through that logic,
if you voted for Mary over Sharmila.
What did you just invent in the process?
Well, if you think about what we spoke
about a short time ago, remember RFM?
Let's put the M part aside, since we
don't know how much they're spending.
But what you were doing is you were
making a trade-off between R and F.
And you would basically say, if you voted
for Mary, that recency trumps frequency.
I would rather see someone who I know was
with me more recently, because there's
a better chance that they're still alive
than someone who did more with me but
there's some reasonable
chance that they're gone.
And that's why our forefathers in
direct marketing called it RFM.
Because they noticed time and time again
that recency was more important than
frequency, which was more
important than monetary value.
And basically all you
folks who just voted for
Mary, you just basically
reinvented that wheel.
And that's a great thing.
It's a recognition that recency and
frequency are these two
key summary statistics.
In some sense, I don't even care about
the particular combination of the,
of the zeros and the ones.
If you could just tell me when
the last one occurred, and
how many ones there were,
that's all I need to know.
That's gonna be enough for me to make
some trade-offs between the Marys and
the Sharmilas.
And if we go a step further with that,
this is a great example of where we're
not necessarily trusting the data.
We're looking at the data as an indication
of something that's going on
below the surface of the data.
In other words recency and
frequency are nice to know, but
more importantly they're indicators of
the true, underlying, unobservable,
propensities of people to make purchases,
to drop out.
To do other kinds of things.
And it's those underlying unobservables
that are gonna help us make
better predictions.
Especially over the long run.
And that's exactly what
I'm talking about here.
Look, we look at someone like Mary and
say, she just made a donation.
Of course she's alive.
We expect there's a pretty
good chance that she might
make a donation in the next period,
because she was around last time.
But with Sharmila,
we see that zero and we ask ourself,
"did she just miss one,
or is she gone for good?
Is she a dormant customer
who might come back, or
is she a lapsed customer who
really is gone for good?".
And this is where we can't necessarily
trust the data to answer that question
for us.
Again it can get us some indications but
we need to tell a story about the stuff
that's going on below the surface of
the data, in order for us to really
understand and make the kinds of long
run projections that we want to make.
Let me give you one other example.
So and I promise this is the last one.
Let's compare Mary to Chris over here.
And I want you to do the same kind of
thing that you did with Mary and Sharmila.
I want you to look at their histories.
I don't want you to get
caught up on any one of them.
I want you to think about that
general type of pattern overall and
who would be more valuable.
The Marys or the Chris's.
So take a moment and think about that.
Look over the pattern, think about
what's relevant there, and tell me.
Would you go for
Mary, in terms of which one's likely
to make more purchases in the future?
Would you go for Chris?
Or would you just say,
eh, they're the same?
So think about that for a second and
I'll jump right in and answer it.
So what do you extract from each of
these patterns to determine how they
compare with each other?
And I'm going to read the minds
of somebody right now.
I bet that some of you looked at
the Chris pattern over here and said,
well since Chris was acquired,
he's gone zero one one zero one one.
So as I look into the future,
I think Chris is gonna go
zero one one zero one one.
And you know what?
You fell into my trap.
So again,
I don't necessarily trust the data.
Do you really believe that Chris is,
every three years is thinking.
Hmm, is this the year that I skip and
then I'm on for two more years?
Probably not, I think that
there's just much more chaos and
noise when people are actually
making these kinds of decisions.
So I don't really wanna look at
the very specific pattern, I wanna draw
the appropriate summary statistics,
that it's gonna tell me something,
not everything, but something about
what's going on below the surface.
Of course the other thing
that many of you did,
I hope that all of you did it,
is you looked at Mary and Chris, and
the first thing you looked at
would be recency and frequency.
And you looked at Mary and
Chris and said, they are the same.
Now some of you might have stopped right
there and said, look, Pete told me
recency and frequency is all that matters
and even though Mary and Chris have
different patterns, their R and F is the
same, so I'm gonna treat them as the same.
And even though they don't like ties,
in some cases if I don't have any
really good information to the contrary,
I'm going to go with that tie.
But I bet that some of you
weren't willing to stop there.
And some of you said, well okay,
the recency and frequency is the same so
let's find a tie breaker.
let's look one period back from the most
recent period and what do we see?
Huh, they both made a donation.
We need to go into double overtime now,
and what do we see?
Oh, Mary made a donation, Chris didn't.
I'll go with Mary.
And to you I say, "shame,
shame shame." Because when our forefathers
in direct marketing invented RFM,
it was all about recency and frequency,
it wasn't about third order recency.
Look, the fact is, that Mary and
Chris both gave most recently.
We know that they were alive last period,
we know that they were alive
at the period before that.
So in some sense I don't really care where
their third to last purchase took place.
All I care about is, say it with me,
recency and frequency.
That's why I was joking
around earlier about ties.
Again, we tend not to like them, we
tend to view that as a sign of weakness.
That we can't do the analysis and
sort these customers out.
But in some cases, if we don't have really
good information to do that sorting out,
we might as well go with a tie, and
I think that would be appropriate
in the case of Mary and Chris.
Okay, that's enough examples for now.
I think by now we've done enough
both to motivate this data set and
the kinds of things we wanna do with it,
as well as some of the early insights.
What I wanna do next though is to
talk about a very specific model.
A story about what's going on
below the surface of the data
that's gonna let us make accurate
projections about Bob and
Sarah, Mary, Sharmila,
Chris, and everybody else.
That's coming next.